Blog on taking a cloud foundry hello world example to k8s (#9)
SUSE-Developer-Community/web-content: content/helloworld-fromcftok8s.md

# Moving a Cloud Foundry Hello World App to Kubernetes - How Hard Can It Be?

> Essentially, I've spent most of last year figuring out Cloud Foundry and then telling others about it. And, believe it or not, I sort of fell in love with the simplicity of pushing a changed code base to the platform with one simple command (aka the ["cf push experience"] (https://www.cloudfoundry.org/blog/cloud-foundrys-proven-developer-experience-comes-to-kubernetes-with-cf-for-k8s-1-0/)). The step from running things locally to running things in the cloud was just one additional file: the Cloud Foundry [manifest](https://docs.cloudfoundry.org/devguide/deploy-apps/manifest.html)). It was so low threshold that I actually stopped testing changes locally. Instead, I just pushed changes to my deployed app immediately. If I had to, I could always hook up a debugger to the deployed app running in Cloud Foundry. 

Reviewer: It might be worth clarifying that you were pushing untested changes to deployed app that was not in production. That might scare some people away...

Author: Valid point - added some language to that end.

## Choosing the base image

When building an application-specific container image, the first decision you'll need to take is which base image you want to start from. It took me a while to figure out how to go about this, since there are a confusingly large amount of choices. I could have gone for a generic operating system image like Ubuntu or [Alpine Linux](https://alpinelinux.org). In the end it seemed best to start from a Python image, so that I didn't have to worry about setting up a proper Python runtime environment first. Not that this would have been particularly difficult, but you know, I'm lazy. 

So I just went to [Docker Hub](http://hub.docker.com) and searched for "Python". I found a [Python image](https://hub.docker.com/_/python) that claims to be an "Official Docker Image" - sounds legit, right? 

Later I found this nice [article](https://medium.com/swlh/alpine-slim-stretch-buster-jessie-bullseye-bookworm-what-are-the-differences-in-docker-62171ed4531d) explaining what the different tag names on Docker Hub mean, which would have helped me a ton at the time. (Spoiler alert: most of them refer to Debian releases the respective images are based on.) 

> ## Building the image

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Building the Image
```

    Successfully built 9f5e24e9052a
```

Then it was time to upload the container to Docker Hub. First I had to give it an official name, a so-called "tag." 

TODO: explain tags and docker hub repositories a bit more

```
    > docker tag 9f5e24e9052a timirnich/timhelloworld:latest
```

> Finally, I was pushed the image to my personal docker hub account. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Finally, I  pushed the image to my personal Docker Hub account. 
```

> Finally, I was pushed the image to my personal docker hub account. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Finally, I pushed the image to my personal Docker Hub account. 
```

```
    > docker push timirnich/timhelloworld:latest
```

# Step 2: Deploying to Kubernetes

> Now that I had a container image built and uploaded to a place Kubernetes access it, I had to  work out how to tell Kubernetes what to do. With Cloud Foundry, what I'm used to doing is writing a manifest.yaml. With Kubernetes, things are a little more complex. Ok, that was an understatement. Things are way more complex. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Now that I had a container image built and uploaded to a place Kubernetes could access it, I had to work out how to tell Kubernetes what to do. With Cloud Foundry, what I'm used to doing is writing a manifest.yaml. With Kubernetes, things are a little more complex. Ok, that was an understatement. Things are way more complex. 
```

## Choosing the Right Workload Resource: Pod, ReplicaSet or Deployment?

The first thing I ran into was a concept called "pods." According to the [Kubernetes documentation](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/workloads/pods/), a pod is "a group of one or more containers, with shared storage/network resources, and a specification for how to run the containers." Sounds about right for what I'm trying to do, doesn't it? However, the documentation also said I shouldn't be using pods, since, in a nutshell, I would be missing out on what Kubernetes is all about - making sure that my app is always available even when something goes wrong (e.g. a container dies). Not that resilience would be of any importance to my use case here. So, let's figure out the proper way. 

> The documentation, as well as many of the examples I found, suggested the use of a resource called "Deployment." Citing the [Kubernetes documentation for Deployments](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/workloads/controllers/deployment/) again, a Deployment "provides declarative updates for Pods and ReplicaSets." What?

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The documentation, as well as many examples, suggested I use a resource called "Deployment." Citing the [Kubernetes documentation for Deployments](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/workloads/controllers/deployment/) again, a Deployment "provides declarative updates for Pods and ReplicaSets." What?
```

TODO: Show the result. 

While I could have run the create command directly, the advantage of doing it this way is that I now have a file on my local disk that I can use to make changes to the deployment easily. For example, if I wanted to pin the container image to a specific version, I could just do

```
       - image: timirnich/timhelloworld:0.5
```

instead. 

# Step 3: Making it Reachable

Now my container is running on Kubernetes, but how do I talk to it? In Cloud Foundry, each app automatically gets a [route](https://docs.cloudfoundry.org/devguide/deploy-apps/routes-domains.html), which is an external http endpoint that hits the default route specified by my app. If I don't specify it, CF assigns a so-called random route when I push my app for the first time. Every app in CF has a route, unless you actively make sure it doesn't get one. Yes, there are cases where that makes sense but that's off topic for now. 

> In Kubernetes, things are a bit more complicated. The Kubernetes deployment resource I used above doesn't care about making things reachable from the outside world - it cares about deploying stuff and making sure that the actual state of the deployment matches the wanted state expressed by it's yaml specification. Nothing else. As a result, the port exposed by the container (the one I specified in the Dockerfile) is only reachable from *within* the cluster - other containers and other pods can (theoretically) use it to talk to my app, but nobody else. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In Kubernetes, things are a bit more complicated. The Kubernetes deployment resource I used above doesn't care about making things reachable from the outside world - it cares about deploying stuff and making sure that the actual state of the deployment matches the wanted state expressed by its yaml specification. Nothing else. As a result, the port exposed by the container (the one I specified in the Dockerfile) is only reachable from *within* the cluster - other containers and other pods can (theoretically) use it to talk to my app, but nobody else. 
```

Btw, a good article that helped me wrap my head around all this is ["Kubernetes Ingress for Beginners"](https://thenewstack.io/kubernetes-ingress-for-beginners/) by Nick Ramirez. Thanks Nick!

> As an aside, it is not a good idea to do it this way either, since pods are ephemeral - they come and go. One key assumption Kubernetes makes about containers is that they die and have to be re-created all the time - as we all know, developers can't be trusted, right? o the deployment's main concern is to make sure that the actual state of the deployment matches the wanted state expressed by its yaml specification. If a container dies, it will recreate it (well, in fact that's what the underlying ReplicaSet does but hey).

Reviewer: Typo `o the deployment's`

> As an aside, it is not a good idea to do it this way either, since pods are ephemeral - they come and go. One key assumption Kubernetes makes about containers is that they die and have to be re-created all the time - as we all know, developers can't be trusted, right? o the deployment's main concern is to make sure that the actual state of the deployment matches the wanted state expressed by its yaml specification. If a container dies, it will recreate it (well, in fact that's what the underlying ReplicaSet does but hey).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
As an aside, it is not a good idea to do it this way either, since pods are ephemeral - they come and go. One key assumption Kubernetes makes about containers is that they die and have to be re-created all the time - as we all know, developers can't be trusted, right? The deployment's main concern is to make sure that the actual state of the deployment matches the wanted state expressed by its yaml specification. If a container dies, it will re-create it  (well, in fact, that's what the underlying ReplicaSet does, but hey).
```

Fair enough, so what else have we got? 

> The first thing you'll run across in many examples is the concept of a Kubernetes *Service*. The [Kubernetes documentation on Services](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/services-networking/service/) says a Service is "an abstract way to expose an application running on a set of Pods as a network service." The key idea of a Service is that it hides the ephemeral nature of a pod - no matter how often pods get restarted or scaled up and down, the service endpoint remains accessible and doesn't change. It also performs basic (round-robin) load balancing, i.e. it makes sure that incoming requests are distributed evenly across a number of identical containers in a pod or a set of pods in a ReplicaSet. 

Reviewer: It also balances across versions. That might overly complicate things but is also a good reason for the extra layer of complication.

Author: I think I don't want to go there for this one, since I haven't really talked about versioning at all.

> So is a Service the Kubernetes counterpart of a Cloud Foundry application route? Not necessarily, since there are different service types you can specify. To make our service externally reachable, we need to make it be of the type "NodePort." This essentially makes Kubernetes assign a random TCP port in the port range between 30000 and 32767 and makes this port reachable outside the cluster. There's another Service type called "LoadBalancer" which essentially implements the service by requesting a load balancer resource from the underlying cloud provider - but let's leave that aside for now. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
So is a Service the Kubernetes counterpart of a Cloud Foundry application route? Not necessarily, since you can specify different service types. To make our service externally reachable, we need to make it be of the type "NodePort." This essentially makes Kubernetes assign a random TCP port in the port range between 30000 and 32767 and makes this port reachable outside the cluster. There's another Service type called "LoadBalancer" which essentially implements the service by requesting a load balancer resource from the underlying cloud provider - but let's leave that aside for now. 
```

> To get things lifted up to the level of domains and hostnames as opposed to IP addresses and ports, I need yet another Kubernetes resource, called Ingress. An Ingress basically specifies how incoming requests should be routed to services. For example, if your app consists of multiple services, you can use an ingress to make sure requests to http://my-app.my-domain/service1 go to service 1, and http://my-app.my-domain/service2 go to service 2.  

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To get things lifted up to the level of domains and hostnames as opposed to IP addresses and ports, I need yet another Kubernetes resource, called Ingress. An Ingress basically specifies how incoming requests should be routed to services. For example, if your app consists of multiple services, you can use an ingress to make sure requests to http://my-app.my-domain/service1 go to service 1 and http://my-app.my-domain/service2 go to service 2.  
```

> For the simple hello world example we're discussing here, it is easy to define an Ingress that does the job of assigning a domain name to my app:

Reviewer: Easy still isn't the right word. Maybe "a single file"? Not sure. But there's a good article I read recently pointing out that "easy" is likely not easy for beginners

> For the simple hello world example we're discussing here, it is easy to define an Ingress that does the job of assigning a domain name to my app:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For the simple hello world example we're discussing here, it's easy to define an Ingress that does the job of assigning a domain name to my app:
```

          servicePort: 8080
```

Note that I'm using the xip.io service to cheat around the fact that I do not have a public DNS entry that resolves to my K3s VM's IP address. I could have entered this into the /etc/hosts file on my laptop but this way is just simpler and quicker. In case you don't know what xip.io does, it simple cuts out the IP address from the URL and sends it back as the IP address this name resolves to. Why didn't I have this idea myself ages ago? Don't say it...

And now, finally, we are back to where we started. What a journey. All just to reproduce what a single 'cf push' command does. 

Am I the first one to note that there's a bit of a complexity problem here? Not at all. If there's one thing that's certain, when something looks like a really good idea, most of the time someone else has already thought of it. Same here. There are tons of tools out there that try to make things simpler for developers when developing apps that only run properly once deployed to Kubernetes. More on that in a future post: stay tuned. 

> If you've made it this far, thank you very much for bearing with me. Remember, the only stupid question is the unasked one. Everybody else is just Googling for stuff too. 

Reviewer 2: Tim, can i get your title and bio? And what picture do you want to use? I pulled the one from Linkedin.
